1. INTRODUCTION

   This application tests the basic functionality of the S-MAC.

2. FUNCTIONALITY

   The default configuration is to use 3 motes. Each mote alternately
   sends a broadcast message and a unicast message. By default, such
   transmission keeps forever until you turn off the motes, but you can
   also set the number of messages a node needs to send.
   
   broadcast messages have only one fragment, and unicast message may
   have multiple fragments (default: 5, maximum: 8). You can change all
   these parameters as well as the configuration of S-MAC in the 
   config.h file.
   
   The packets that each node transmits include the statistics of
   packets that it received from all current active neighbors (receiver
   based link quality measurement).

   You can configure S-MAC to run in different modes: low duty cycle with
   adaptive listen, low duty cycle without adaptive listen, and fully active
   mode.

   By default, each mote sends both broadcast messages and unicast messages.
   You can change it to only test broadcast or unicast. Message length can
   be changed by define PHY_MAX_PKT_LEN.

   All the configurations are done in config.h. Please see it for details.
   
   The yellow LED shows the activity of the radio (on or off). The red LED
   toggles when a packet/fragment is sent out. The green LED toggles when a
   packet/fragment is received.

3. HOW TO USE

   Suppose you are using 3 motes as the default setting.
   
   1) Compile and install by 'make mica' and 'make install mica'.
   2) You can either specify node ID (TOS_LOCAL_ADDRESS) in system/tos.h, or
      simply using 'make install.x mica', where x is the node ID.
   3) Each node first sends 10 broadcast messages, and followed by 10 
      unicast message. The default unicast address for each node is
      - node 1 sends to node 2
      - node 2 sends to node 3
      - node 3 sends to node 1
     This triangle makes sure their transmissions are interfere with each other.
   
4. NOTES

   All configurable parameters of the application, S-MAC, and the physical
   layers are listed (and some are used) in config.h file.


