Surge 3.0
Matt Welsh, mdw@cs.berkeley.edu
Dennis Chi

This is an updated version of the Surge demo, ported to NesC.

DESCRIPTION:

This is a demonstration of multihop routing in a sensor network. Each
mote periodically takes a light sensor reading and transmits it to its
"parent", a node which it believes is closer to the base station (the
parent may be the base station itself). When a mote receives a messages
from one of its children, it forwards the message to its parent. 

When initialized, each mote starts with no parent, and does not transmit
sensor readings until it has established one. The GUI periodically
broadcasts a "root beacon" that seeds the formation of the multihop
routing tree; the beacon merely indicates that the root node (node 0) is
available and has a hopcount of 0. If a mote with no parent hears the
root beacon, it will set its parent to the root.

A mote continues to use the same parent until the "link quality" to the
parent falls below some threshold. The link quality is defined as the
fraction of messages that did not require retransmission -- that is, 
the fraction of transmissions from a child to a parent that were
successful. When the parent link quality falls below a threshold (20% by
default), the node chooses a new parent from its neighbors, which is the
set of nodes that the mote has overhead messages from recently. Roughly,
the mote chooses a new parent that is (a) not a child of the current
node, (b) has the lowest hopcount of all known neighbors, and (c) has
the highest "goodness" of all known neighbors. "Goodness" is defined as
the fraction of messages overheard from this neighbor.

Note that the root beacon will tend to cause motes to choose the root
as a parent. A mote that hears the root beacon will choose the root as
its parent if its current parent link quality is below 50% (rather than
20%, as above). If you disable the root beacon (from the GUI) before 
powering on some motes, they will necessarily have to choose a parent 
that is *not* the root. This is a good way to induce multihop paths for
demo purposes.

MEANING OF THE LEDS:

Yellow LED: The mote has received a message.
Green LED: The mote has sent a message.
Red LED: The mote did not receive an ACK for a sent message, and is
retransmitting.

RUNNING THE DEMO:

  1) Set up your environment. You need to add
       $PWD/surge3/tools/java
     to your CLASSPATH. Also, edit 
       $PWD/surge3/apps/Makerules
     and set DEFAULT_LOCAL_GROUP to the same value that you are using in
     your tinyos-1.x/apps/Makerules file. It is very important that the
     DEFAULT_LOCAL_GROUP is the same in both places.

  2) Install GenericBase on one mote with ID 0:
       cd tinyos-1.x/apps/GenericBase
       make mica install.0
     It is important that the base is node 0.

  3) On other motes, install the Surge app:
       cd experimental/mdw/surge3/apps/Surge
       make mica install.<ID>  
     where <ID> is distinct for each mote (1 through 10).
   
  4) Plug the GenericBase into your programming board and make sure 
     SerialForward is running:
       java net.tinyos.sf.SerialForward

  5) Compile the Java GUI:
       cd surge3/tools/java/net/tinyos/surge; make

  6) Run the Java GUI:
       java net.tinyos.surge.MainClass <GROUP ID>
     where <GROUP ID> is the DEFAULT_LOCAL_GROUP that you have specified
     in Step (1), above. This can be specified in hex or decimal.
     For example,
       java net.tinyos.surge.MainClass 125
     is equivalant to
       java net.tinyos.surge.MainClass 0x7d

  7) Turn on the Surge motes. The motes will not blink initially, since
     they are not receiving or sending messages.
  
  8) To get the Surge motes to start transmitting data, you need to seed
     the creation of the spanning tree by clicking on "Start root beacon"
     on the Java GUI. This starts a periodic root beacon (once per
     second), and soon you should see motes start to connect to the
     root in the GUI.

DESCRIPTION OF THE GUI:

Each mote "blinks" with a red circle when the GUI has heard a sensor
sample from that mote. Below each mote the total number of received
sensor messages is given, as well as the average message rate taken over
a 2-second sample. (Note that this does NOT include messages that this 
mote has forwarded -- only those sample messages that it originated!)

The color bar labelled "Quality" gives the mote's current parent link
quality, as described above, with 100% being perfect quality (no
retransmissions). The color of the bar (from green to red) represents
this value. The color of the edge from the mote to its parent is the
same as the color of the "Quality" bar -- this is intentionally redundant.

The color bar labelled "Yield" represents the rate of sensor messages
heard from this mote as a fraction of the expected number of sensor
messages. For example, if each mote is generating a sample at 1 message
a second, and the GUI is hearing a message every 2 seconds, the "Yield"
is 0.5. Note that yield can be greater than 1 if the GUI hears more
messages from the mote than it should be generating -- this can be
caused by forwarding backlog as well as a lag in the update rate of the
GUI itself.

You can click on each mote and drag it to a new position. Clicking on
"Fit to Screen" will fit all of the motes in the current window, since
the initial random placement of motes might put some of them off the
screen. Clicking on "Status" will turn off the display of the detailed 
statistics for each mote, but otherwise unaffects the operation of the
application. Clicking on "Debug" will cause each sent and received
message to be printed to stderr (the console window).

Clicking on "Start root beacon" will start sending the root beacon at a
specified rate (once per second by default). Clicking on "Stop root
beacon" stops sending the root beacon, which is useful if you want to
force motes to connect to their neighbors instead of the root.

"Control Panel" brings up a window that allows you to set two
parameters: The root beacon rate and the rate at which motes transmit
light sensor readings. Moving the "Beacon rate" slider sets the time
between beacons between 1 and 10 sec, and takes effect immediately
(assuming that "Start root beacon" has been clicked previously).
Moving the "Sample rate" slider sets the sample rate, which is
transmitted to the motes when you click on the "Change sample rate"
button immediately below the slider. In other words, this slider has no
effect until you click "Change sample rate".

Note that when motes are rebooted they reset their sample rate to 1 Hz,
so even if you have set the sample rate to something else in the GUI, 
you will need to click on "Control panel" and "Change sample rate" again
if any motes are rebooted.

The "Send sleep" button broadcasts a command to all motes to put
themselves to "sleep" - that is, to stop forwarding messages, stop
generating sensor readings, etc. This is a good way to quiesce all the
motes for ending the demo. The "Send wakeup" button broadcasts a command
that undoes the effect of "Send sleep" - it allows motes to start
transmitting again. Note that if you send a wakeup command, but the
root beacon is inactive, then the motes won't do anything as they have
no parent. In this case just click "Start root beacon" after clicking 
"Send wakeup".

Clicking the RIGHT mouse button on a mote causes the demo to "focus" on
that mote -- it highlights the mote in the display and sends it a
command to increase its sample rate to 5 Hz. All other motes reduce
their sample rate to 0.5 Hz, giving the "focused" mote the opportunity
to get a greater proportion of the radio bandwidth. The focused node
will also periodically beep its sounder, so whomever is holding the mote
knows that it is active. Note that you may need to right-click on the
focused mote several times to get the command to propagate.

Clicking on "Cancel focus" undoes the focus operation, causing all motes
to return to normal operation. As with focus (and the other commands,
see below) it may be necessary to click this button several times - you
will know it worked when the mote stops beeping. In the worst case have
the person holding the beeping mote power-cycle it.

IMPORTANT:

When sending commands to the motes (e.g., Sleep, Wakeup, Change sample
rate, Focus, and Unfocus), it is important to keep in mind that command 
flooding is unreliable, so it is possible that not all motes will hear
the command the first time you send it. It is not a bad idea to click
the button several times to ensure that the message has been flooded.

If things appear to get wedged during the demo, it is perfectly safe to
restart the GUI - just be sure to click on "Start root beacon" again.


