The ThreeAxisRecorder tinyos program acts as an accelerometer data logger
program.  To start the datalogging, place the SHIMMER in the dock and
run the python script start_recording.py

python start_recording.py

The script will autodetect the USB port of the dock.  If you have more
than one dock connected, it will pick the one of them, which may not
be the one you are using, so only have one dock connected when you are
using this program.  

This script syncronizes the time on the SHIMMER with the time on the
PC and starts the SHIMMER data collection.  After runing this script,
the green LED on SHIMMER will blink, letting you know it is collecting
data.  You then can take SHIMMER out of the dock and use it.

When you are done collecting data, place SHIMMMER back on the dock and
press the square user button on the dock.  This will stop SHIMMER from
recording data.  The green LED will shut off and the orange LED will
come on, letting you know there is data to be downloaded. 

To get the data off of SHIMMER, run the download_data.py script with
SHIMMER still in the dock.  Run the program like this: 

python download_data.py > output.csv

This will store the data in the file output.csv

The output is lines of 5 comma seperated values.  The first field is
the timestamp (in localtime) in a format that SPSS handles.  The
second field is the timestamp (in localtime) if Excel format.  The
next 3 fields are the x, y, and z axis of the accelerometer.  The last
field is the timestamp (in UTC) in standard Unix time format.  Not
every sample tuplet (x,y,z) has a timestamp.  Only every 83 sample
tuplets have an actual timestamp.  

After the download is complete, the orange LED will shut off and the
green LED will be on, letting you know that SHIMMER is ready to
collect more data. 

SD Card File Format:
--------------------

There is no filesystem on the SD card.  The accelerometer data is
written to the SD card is sectors of 512 bytes.  The first written
sector, which starts at SD card sector 2000, is the header for the
file.  The first 4 bytes of the header contains 0s.  This is normally
the timestamp of the sector.  The next 8 bytes the timstamp offset.
This is the difference between the clock on the host PC and the clock
running on the shimmer.  The next four bytes are the number of sectors
in the file.  The rest of the 512 bytes are randomly generated. 

Data sectors:
-------------

After the header, the rest of the sectors are data sectors.  Samples
are taken as an x,y,z group every 20/1024 milliseconds, or 51.2 Hz.
83 sample groups fit on one 512 byte sector.  Each sector has a 4 byte
timestamp.  This number is the value of the SHIMMER clock after the
first 3 samples have been taken for this sector.  The last two bytes
of the sector is a crc16 checksum. 



